.TH FORGE 1 "2026-05-06" "InterGenOS v1.0" "InterGenOS System Administration"
.SH NAME
forge \- InterGenOS system installer (GUI or declarative-builder TUI)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B forge
.B \-\-archives
.I DIR
.RB [ \-\-mode
.IR gui | tui | live ]
.RB [ \-\-packages
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-dry-run ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B forge
is the InterGenOS system installer. It is invoked from the live ISO's GRUB
menu (entries
.B "Install (Graphical)"
and
.BR "Install (TUI Builder)" )
or from the
.B "Install InterGenOS"
launcher icon on the live GNOME desktop.
.PP
Forge runs in three modes, dispatched by the
.B igos.installer=
parameter on the kernel command line (set by the GRUB menu) or by an explicit
.B \-\-mode
flag.
.SH MODES
.TP
.B gui
A GTK4 / libadwaita graphical installer with seven screens:
.B Welcome
\(em>
.B "Keyboard / Locale / Timezone"
\(em>
.B Disk
\(em>
.B User
\(em>
.B Confirm
\(em>
.B Progress
\(em>
.BR Done .
The order matches the modal pattern of other distros (locale up front, the
destructive disk decision before the user account, then final confirm + progress
+ done). Default mode when launched from a Wayland session.
.TP
.B tui
A declarative-builder TUI on
.IR tty1 .
The TUI is
.B not
a text-mode version of the GUI \(em it is a builder. The user is walked
through a small set of yaml-bound questions (locale, timezone, hostname,
optional package toggles) via
.BR dialog (1),
the answers are emitted to
.IR /var/lib/forge/install.yaml ,
and the install then runs non-interactively from that yaml. The disk choice
and root + user passwords are
.B not
written to yaml \(em they are prompted for inline during the install proper.
Pre-seeding the disk would be a fat-finger risk; pre-seeding a password would
be a supply-chain risk.
.TP
.B live
No install is dispatched. This mode is reached when no
.B igos.installer=
parameter is on the kernel cmdline; the live GNOME session shows a desktop
launcher that re-invokes forge in
.B gui
mode when the user explicitly clicks it.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-archives " " \fIDIR\fR
.B Required.
Path to the directory of
.B .igos.tar.gz
package archives produced by the InterGenOS build pipeline (typically
.IR /var/lib/igos/archives
on the live ISO).
.TP
.BR \-\-mode " " { gui | tui | live }
Force a specific frontend, overriding the
.B igos.installer=
kernel cmdline parameter and the session-type heuristic. Useful for testing
the GUI from a tty1 session or vice versa.
.TP
.BR \-\-packages " " \fIDIR\fR
Path to the
.B packages/
directory in the InterGenOS source tree, used by the post-install hook
runner and for tier-to-package mapping. Optional; if omitted, all archives
in
.B \-\-archives
are installed without tier filtering.
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Log all destructive commands (partitioning, package install, account
creation, bootloader install) without executing them. The walking sequence
and yaml emit still run; only the destructive steps are skipped.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print
.B forge
version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH MODE SELECTION
When
.B \-\-mode
is not supplied, forge resolves the effective mode in the following priority:
.IP 1.
.B igos.installer=
on
.B /proc/cmdline
(set by the GRUB menu entry the user selected at boot).
.IP 2.
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
in the environment, or
.B XDG_SESSION_TYPE=wayland
\(em both indicate a graphical session and resolve to
.BR gui .
.IP 3.
Fallback:
.B tui
on a console without a graphical session.
.SH TUI WALKING SEQUENCE
The TUI walking sequence asks for four pieces of information in order:
.IP 1.
.B Locale
\(em a glibc locale (e.g.
.IR en_US.UTF-8 ).
A short list of common locales is presented; "other" lets the user type a
custom value.
.IP 2.
.B Timezone
\(em an IANA timezone (e.g.
.IR America/Chicago ).
A short list of common zones is presented; "other" lets the user type a
custom value.
.IP 3.
.B Hostname
\(em the machine name (default
.IR intergenos ).
.IP 4.
.B "Package groups"
\(em a checklist of high-level package groups
.RB ( core ", " base ", " desktop-gnome ", " extra ", " ai ).
.B core
is required and is force-included even if the user un-toggles it.
.PP
The walking sequence emits
.IR /var/lib/forge/install.yaml
on completion. Disk and password collection happens immediately after, in a
separate phase that is
.B not
written to yaml.
.SH INSTALL CONFIG SCHEMA
The yaml emitted by the walking phase has the following schema:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
version: 1
locale: "en_US.UTF-8"
timezone: "America/Chicago"
hostname: "intergenos"
package_groups:
  - core
  - base
  - desktop-gnome
.fi
.RE
.PP
The yaml lives on the live overlay at
.B /var/lib/forge/install.yaml
and is not persisted to the installed target.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
If set, the session-type heuristic resolves to
.BR gui .
.TP
.B XDG_SESSION_TYPE
If set to
.BR wayland ,
the session-type heuristic resolves to
.BR gui .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/forge/install.yaml
Ephemeral yaml config emitted by the TUI walking phase; consumed by the
declarative-install runner.
.TP
.I /var/lib/igos/archives
Default archive directory on the live ISO.
.TP
.I /mnt/target
Mountpoint where the target root is assembled before the bootloader install.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Install completed successfully (or
.B \-\-dry-run
exit).
.TP
.B 1
User cancelled during the walking phase or the disk/password prompt phase.
.TP
.B 2
.B \-\-archives
directory not found, or unknown
.B \-\-mode
value, or running as non-root.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Auto-detect mode from the GRUB cmdline:
.B forge \-\-archives /var/lib/igos/archives
.TP
Force the TUI builder (e.g. for testing from a graphical session):
.B forge \-\-mode tui \-\-archives /var/lib/igos/archives
.TP
Dry-run the GUI install path against a custom archive directory:
.B forge \-\-mode gui \-\-archives ~/build/archives \-\-dry-run
.SH SECURITY
.B forge
must run as
.BR root .
The installer collects the root and user passwords interactively
.RB ( "" "tui" "" )
or via
.BR Gtk.PasswordEntry " (" "" "gui" "" )
and never echoes them. Passwords are passed to
.BR chpasswd (8)
via stdin, never via command-line arguments.
.PP
On EFI systems the user is also asked for a one-time MOK enrollment password.
This password is staged with the InterGenOS Machine Owner Key keypair and
prompted for once, in MokManager, on the first reboot after install. After
enrollment the password is no longer required.
.PP
The TUI walking sequence's yaml is intentionally narrow: it carries
.BR locale ", " timezone ", " hostname ", and " "package groups " only.
Disks and passwords are collected interactively at install time so a stray or
adversarial yaml cannot pre-seed a destructive disk choice or a known
password.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pkm (1),
.BR chpasswd (8),
.BR dialog (1),
.BR systemd-stub (8),
.BR mokutil (1),
.BR sbsign (1)
.PP
.IR docs/research/installer/iso-implementation-plan-2026-05-05.md
\(em authoritative plan for the 3-part Secure Boot ISO of which forge is
Phase 4.
.PP
.IR intergenos-first-boot (7)
\(em the first-boot password greeter that runs on the installed system.
.SH AUTHORS
The InterGenOS maintainers.
