.TH FORGE-ISO 1 "2026-05-06" "InterGenOS v1.0" "InterGenOS Build Tooling"
.SH NAME
forge-iso \- assemble the InterGenOS hybrid bootable ISO from signed components
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "SHIM=" \fIPATH\fR
.B "GRUB=" \fIPATH\fR
.B "UKI=" \fIPATH\fR
.B "SQUASHFS=" \fIPATH\fR
.B "OUTPUT=" \fIPATH\fR
.B scripts/build-iso.sh
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B forge-iso
.RI ( "scripts/build-iso.sh" )
is the Phase 3 ISO assembly script of the 3-part Secure Boot ISO plan. It
consumes already-signed
.BR shim ", " GRUB ", and " UKI
binaries plus a built squashfs root filesystem and produces a single
.B hybrid-bootable
.IR .iso
file with a GPT + ESP partition (UEFI Secure Boot path), an El Torito boot
record (BIOS-legacy path; same UEFI binary loaded), and the squashfs at
.IR /live/filesystem.squashfs .
.PP
The script does
.B not
sign anything. The signing flow is two-stage: the build VM produces unsigned
artifacts, the workstation runs the sign helpers
.RB ( scripts/sign-shim.sh ", "
.BR scripts/sign-grub.sh ", "
.BR scripts/sign-kernel-uki.sh )
against the InterGenOS vendor cert held on Nitrokey #1 PIV slot 9c, and the
signed binaries are then handed to
.BR forge-iso .
The build VM never holds signing material.
.SH OPTIONS
.B forge-iso
takes
.B no command-line flags
\(em all parameters are passed via shell environment variables. See
.B ENVIRONMENT
below. Contrast with
.BR forge (1),
which is a CLI tool driven by argparse with a
.B \-\-archives
flag and other options. The two manpages are intentionally distinct
surfaces:
.B forge
is the runtime installer; this tool is a build-time shell script.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.SS Required
.TP
.B SHIM
Path to the signed
.IR shimx64.efi .
This is loaded by firmware as
.B /EFI/BOOT/BOOTX64.EFI
and is also placed at the canonical
.B /EFI/InterGenOS/shimx64.efi
on the ESP.
.TP
.B GRUB
Path to the signed
.IR grubx64.efi
(produced by
.BR build-grub-standalone.sh
+ signed by
.BR sign-grub.sh ).
.TP
.B UKI
Path to the signed
.IR igos-live.efi
\(em the Unified Kernel Image (vmlinuz + initramfs + cmdline + os-release)
produced by
.BR build-uki.sh
+ signed by
.BR sign-kernel-uki.sh .
.TP
.B SQUASHFS
Path to the live root filesystem squashfs (produced by the squashfs build
phase, not part of forge-iso's scope).
.TP
.B OUTPUT
Path to write the resulting
.IR .iso
file (typically
.IR build/intergenos-1.0-dev1.iso ).
.SS Optional
.TP
.B GRUB_CFG
ESP-side
.IR grub.cfg
(default:
.IR installer/iso/grub/grub.cfg ).
This is the user-facing 3-entry menu (Try / Install GUI / Install TUI).
.TP
.B THEME_DIR
GRUB theme directory to embed at
.B /EFI/InterGenOS/themes/
(default: skipped if absent).
.TP
.B UNICODE_PF2
GRUB unicode font (default:
.IR /usr/share/grub/unicode.pf2 ).
Required for the GRUB
.B gfxmenu
theme renderer.
.TP
.B VOLID
ISO9660 volume id (default:
.B IGOS_X86_64_<YYYYMMDD>
where
.IR YYYYMMDD
is derived from
.BR SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH ).
The custom 100-line
.B /init
in the UKI's initramfs uses this to discover the boot media via
.BR root=live:LABEL=$VOLID .
.TP
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
For reproducible builds. xorriso 1.5.6+ honours this directly. If unset, the
script defaults to build-start time and emits a warning. Reproducibility is
a v1.0 release requirement (per Q-REPRO-GOAL); the caller (typically
.BR build-intergenos.sh )
is expected to set this.
.TP
.B LOG_DIR
Directory for build logs (default:
.IR build/logs/iso ).
A timestamped log file
.IR build_<YYYYMMDDTHHMMSSZ>.log
is created per invocation.
.TP
.B ESP_HEADROOM_MB
Extra MB to add to the ESP image beyond the computed file size (default:
.BR 16 ).
Covers FAT32 metadata + spare. The minimum FAT32 size of 33 MB is enforced;
the headroom kicks in above that.
.SH OUTPUT
A single
.IR .iso
file at
.B OUTPUT
that is bootable in three modes:
.IP \(bu 2
.B UEFI Secure Boot:
firmware loads
.IR /EFI/BOOT/BOOTX64.EFI
(= shim) from the ESP partition, shim chains to GRUB, GRUB chains to the UKI.
.IP \(bu 2
.B UEFI without Secure Boot:
same path; signature checks pass trivially because shim allows it under
disabled SB.
.IP \(bu 2
.B BIOS-legacy:
the El Torito boot record loads the same UEFI binary via the hybrid MBR.
.PP
The .iso burns to a USB stick directly via
.BR dd (1)
or any imaging tool that handles hybrid-MBR/GPT images.
.SH ESP LAYOUT
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
/EFI/BOOT/BOOTX64.EFI            (= shimx64.efi  — firmware fallback path)
/EFI/InterGenOS/shimx64.efi      (= shimx64.efi  — canonical path)
/EFI/InterGenOS/grubx64.efi      (signed standalone GRUB)
/EFI/InterGenOS/igos-live.efi    (signed UKI)
/EFI/InterGenOS/grub.cfg         (3-entry menu)
/EFI/InterGenOS/themes/          (theme dir if present)
/EFI/InterGenOS/fonts/unicode.pf2 (GRUB unicode font)
.fi
.RE
.SH ISO LAYOUT
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
/live/filesystem.squashfs        (root fs the UKI's initramfs mounts)
/live/filesystem.sha256          (sha256 of squashfs for /init verification)
/IGOS_LIVE                       (volume marker; contains VOLID string)
.fi
.RE
.SH SELF-VERIFICATION
The script runs
.B xorriso -indev <output> -report_about ALL
post-build and asserts that GPT and ESP / El Torito boot records are present.
A
.IR <log-dir>/indev_<timestamp>.txt
file captures the full report for later inspection. The script also runs
.BR file (1)
on the output and checks for the ISO 9660 / DOS/MBR signature, then emits
.BR sha256sum (1)
of the .iso for reproducibility attestation. Any of these checks failing
causes a non-zero exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
ISO produced; self-verify passed.
.TP
.B 1
Required env var unset, input file not found, required tool missing
.RB ( xorriso ", " mkfs.vfat ", " mcopy ", " mmd ),
xorriso failed, or self-verify failed.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I scripts/build-iso.sh
The script itself.
.TP
.I installer/iso/grub/grub.cfg
Default ESP-side
.IR grub.cfg
(referenced via the
.B GRUB_CFG
env var).
.TP
.I build/logs/iso/build_<timestamp>.log
Timestamped build log (path overridable via
.BR LOG_DIR ).
.TP
.I build/logs/iso/indev_<timestamp>.txt
xorriso self-verify report, captured for forensics.
.SH SECURITY
.B forge-iso
operates only on already-signed binaries. It does not have access to any
signing material and runs in the build VM (not the workstation that holds
the signing keys). The two-stage signing flow is documented in
.IR docs/signing-procedure.md .
.PP
Reproducibility is required at v1.0: two independent runs of this script
with the same
.B SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
and the same input binaries must produce a byte-identical
.IR .iso .
The
.IR scripts/verify-b2-reproducibility.sh
harness covers cross-host reproducibility evidence. Native-Linux Docker
hosts produce deterministic, host-independent SHAs (validated 2026-05-06
across SPOC's Ubuntu workstation + a 3rd-laptop Ubuntu 22.04 host). Docker
Desktop's virtualisation layer is documented as out-of-scope for the strict
reproducibility attestation.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xorriso (1),
.BR mkfs.vfat (8),
.BR mcopy (1),
.BR forge (1)
.PP
.IR scripts/build-uki.sh
\(em UKI assembly (Phase 2).
.PP
.IR scripts/build-grub-standalone.sh
\(em standalone GRUB build (Phase 1).
.PP
.IR scripts/sign-shim.sh ", "
.IR scripts/sign-grub.sh ", "
.IR scripts/sign-kernel-uki.sh
\(em signing helpers; produce the inputs to forge-iso.
.PP
.IR scripts/verify-b2-reproducibility.sh
\(em cross-build SHA-256 diff harness.
.PP
.IR docs/research/installer/iso-implementation-plan-2026-05-05.md
\(em authoritative plan for the 3-part Secure Boot ISO of which forge-iso
is Phase 3.
.SH AUTHORS
The InterGenOS maintainers.
