.TH INTERGENOS-FIRST-BOOT 7 "2026-04-30" "InterGenOS v1.0" "InterGenOS System Administration"
.SH NAME
intergenos-first-boot \- InterGenOS first-boot password greeter
.SH DESCRIPTION
The first time an InterGenOS image boots, the system pauses before the
graphical login screen and prompts for a new user password on a text-mode
terminal. This is the
.B first-boot greeter
\(em a one-shot service whose only job is to make sure the person at the
console picks the password they will actually use, before the system is
admitted to multi-user state.
.PP
InterGenOS ships
.B no default passwords.
The build script that produces an image refuses to run without explicit
.B \-\-root\-password
and
.B \-\-user\-password
arguments, and whatever values the builder supplied are immediately
overwritten by the first-boot greeter the first time the image boots. A
fresh image is bootable but not loggable-in-to until the prompt is
completed.
.SH FIRST-BOOT BEHAVIOR
After the boot animation finishes, the screen clears and a plain text
prompt appears, asking for a new password and a confirmation. Typing is
silent (no echo, no asterisks); this is intentional.
.PP
If the two entries do not match, or either is empty, the greeter rejects
the input and re-prompts. There is no retry limit. The system does not
proceed to the graphical login screen until a valid password is chosen.
.PP
On successful completion, the greeter writes
.I /etc/intergenos/first-boot-completed
marking the system as first-boot complete. The unit
.RB ( intergenos-first-boot-greeter.service )
is gated on the absence of this flag via
.BR ConditionPathExists ,
so subsequent boots skip the greeter without invoking it.
.PP
The greeter prompts for two passwords in order: first the
.B root
account password, then the password for the user account named by the
.B INTERGENOS_USER
environment variable (set by a drop-in installed alongside the unit).
Both prompts must complete successfully for the unit to write the flag.
.PP
Beyond rejecting empty entries and mismatched confirmations, the
greeter does not impose its own length or character-class rules. It
hands the password to
.BR chpasswd (8),
which honors whatever password-policy rules the system's PAM stack is
configured with. Rejection messages from PAM modules
.RB ( pam_pwquality ", " pam_cracklib )
are printed on the same tty so the user sees the reason and can pick
a password the policy accepts.
.SH RECOVERY
.TP
.B Power-cycle mid-prompt
The flag file is written atomically only after both password entries
succeed. An interrupted run leaves the flag absent, and the greeter
re-fires on the next boot.
.TP
.B Greeter unit fails to start
The unit declares
.B OnFailure=getty@tty1.service
so any non-zero exit (missing
.BR chpasswd ,
missing user account, missing
.B INTERGENOS_USER
drop-in, or other script error) routes systemd to a normal text-mode
login on the same tty. The user can log in with the build-time
credentials and run
.BR passwd (1)
to set new ones.
.TP
.B Headless or SSH-only first boot
The greeter is bound to
.IR /dev/tty1 .
On a system with no usable tty1 (serial-console-only servers,
appliances) the
.B OnFailure
fallback also requires tty1, so the local console is unreachable;
SSH access (if installed) works using the build-time credentials.
Serial-console fallback is out of scope for v1, which is desktop-first.
The supported recovery is to log in via SSH with the build-time
credentials, run
.BR passwd (1),
then
.B touch /etc/intergenos/first-boot-completed
so the greeter does not gate subsequent boots.
.TP
.B Forgotten password after first boot
First-boot only sets the password the first time. Subsequent password
recovery is identical to any Linux distribution: boot a recovery image,
mount the root filesystem, run
.BR passwd (1).
.SH USERNAME
The username for the user account is set at image build time, not at
first boot. Changing it on a running system requires more than a
directory rename because file ownership is baked in across the system.
The supported path for a different username is to rebuild with
.B "build-intergenos.sh \-\-image-user " \fINAME\fR
or to create an additional user with
.BR useradd (8)
after first login.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/intergenos-first-boot-greeter.service
systemd unit definition for the greeter
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/intergenos-first-boot-greeter.service.d/intergenos-user.conf
drop-in installed by
.BR create-image (8)
setting
.B Environment=INTERGENOS_USER=<account>
so the greeter knows which account to prompt for
.TP
.I /usr/libexec/intergenos/first-boot-greeter
bash script that prompts and pipes the password to
.BR chpasswd (8)
.TP
.I /etc/intergenos/first-boot-completed
written after successful first boot; gates re-invocation
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
both passwords set successfully; flag file written; unit completes
cleanly
.TP
.B 2
.BR chpasswd (8)
binary not found in the image
.TP
.B 3
the user account named by
.B INTERGENOS_USER
does not exist
.TP
.B 4
.B INTERGENOS_USER
environment variable empty or not set (service drop-in missing or
malformed)
.PP
Any non-zero exit triggers
.B OnFailure=getty@tty1.service
so the user always reaches a usable prompt; the codes are a forensic
aid for diagnosing why the greeter dropped through, not a
UX-affecting branch.
.SH SECURITY
The two-layer posture (build-time required arguments + first-boot
overwrite) ensures no shared default credential exists at any point in
the lifecycle of an InterGenOS image. The build script refuses to
produce an image with a literal default; the first-boot greeter
overwrites whatever the builder supplied with a value chosen by the
person at the console.
.PP
The greeter runs on a tty rather than through Plymouth or a graphical
prompt because a tty is the most reliable way to ask for a password on
a system whose graphical stack has not yet been exercised. A failure of
the graphical stack does not lock the user out of completing first boot.
.PP
The greeter pipes the chosen password to
.BR chpasswd (8)
via stdin. The password never appears on a command line, in a file on
disk between input and the
.B chpasswd
invocation, or in the systemd journal beyond a generic completion
indicator.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chpasswd (8),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR systemd.unit (5),
.BR useradd (8)
.PP
.IR docs/first-boot-greeter.md
\(em the long-form companion document, including the build-time half of
the credential posture and the rationale behind the two-layer design.
.PP
.IR docs/ephemeral-module-signing.md
\(em the kernel-module signing trust chain (separate from the user
password set here).
.SH AUTHORS
The InterGenOS maintainers.
